Add instruction of workload cluster backup and restore (#6783)
aws/eks-anywhere: docs/content/en/docs/clustermgmt/cluster-backup-restore/restore-cluster.md

Depending on whether the infrastructure components are changed or not after the etcd backup was take - e.g. machines are rolled out and recreated, new IP address assigned to the machines - different strategy needs to be applied in order to restore the management cluster.

### Infrastructure components not changed after etcd backup was taken

If the underlying infrastructure machines are not changed after the etcd backup was taken, simply follow the [External etcd backup and restore]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/etcdbackup" >}}) to restore the management cluster from the backup.

TODO: what if cluster is not accessible?

> ### Infrastructure components changed after etcd backup was taken

Reviewer: So this will mainly cover replacing the management cluster only?

1. Create a new management cluster to which you will be migrating your workload clusters later.

    You can define a cluster config similar to your old management cluster, with a different cluster name, and run cluster creation of the new management cluster.

    ```sh
    eksctl anywhere create cluster -f mgmt-new.yaml
    ```

1. Move the custom resources of all the workload clusters to the new management cluster created above.

    Using vSphere provider as an example, we are moving the Cluster API custom resources, such as `vpsherevms`, `vspheremachines` and `machines` of the **workload clusters**, from the old management cluster to the new management cluster created in above step. Using the `--filter-cluster` flag with `clusterctl move` command so that we are only targeting the custom resources from the workload clusters.

    ```bash

>     MGMT_CLUSTER_OLD="mgmt-old"

Reviewer: Maybe call out that this is an example?

---
title: "Restore cluster"
linkTitle: "Restore cluster"
weight: 20
aliases:
    /docs/tasks/cluster/cluster-backup-restore/restore-cluster/
description: >
  How to restore your EKS Anywhere cluster from backup
---

In certain unfortunate circumstances, an EKS Anywhere cluster may find itself in an unrecoverable state due to various factors such as a failed cluster upgrade, underlying infrastructure problems, or network issues, rendering the cluster inaccessible through conventional means. This document outlines detailed steps to guide you through the process of restoring a failed cluster from backups in these critical situations.

## Prerequisite

Always backup your EKS Anywhere cluster. Refer to the [Backup cluster]({{< relref "./backup-cluster" >}}) and make sure you have the updated etcd and Cluster API backup at hand.

## Restore a management cluster

> As EKS Anywhere management cluster contains the management components of itself plus all the workload clusters it manages, the restoring process can be more complicated than just restoring all the objects from the etcd backup. To be more specific, all the core EKS Anywhere and Cluster API custom resources, managing the lifecycle (provisioning, upgrading, operating, etc.) of the management and its workload clusters, are stored in the management cluster. This includes all the supporting infrastructure, like virtual machines, networks and load balancers. For example, after a failed cluster upgrade, the infrastructure components can change after the etcd backup was taken. Since the backup does not contain the new state of the half upgraded cluster, simply restoring it can create the virtual machines UUID and IP mismatches, rendering EKS Anywhere incapable of healing the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As EKS Anywhere management cluster contains the management components of itself plus all the workload clusters it manages, the restoration process can be more complicated than just restoring all the objects from the etcd backup. To be more specific, all the core EKS Anywhere and Cluster API custom resources, managing the lifecycle (provisioning, upgrading, operating, etc.) of the management and its workload clusters, are stored in the management cluster. This includes all the supporting infrastructure, like virtual machines, networks and load balancers. For example, after a failed cluster upgrade, the infrastructure components can change after the etcd backup was taken. Since the backup does not contain the new state of the half upgraded cluster, simply restoring it can create the virtual machines UUID and IP mismatches, rendering EKS Anywhere incapable of healing the cluster.
```

> As EKS Anywhere management cluster contains the management components of itself plus all the workload clusters it manages, the restoring process can be more complicated than just restoring all the objects from the etcd backup. To be more specific, all the core EKS Anywhere and Cluster API custom resources, managing the lifecycle (provisioning, upgrading, operating, etc.) of the management and its workload clusters, are stored in the management cluster. This includes all the supporting infrastructure, like virtual machines, networks and load balancers. For example, after a failed cluster upgrade, the infrastructure components can change after the etcd backup was taken. Since the backup does not contain the new state of the half upgraded cluster, simply restoring it can create the virtual machines UUID and IP mismatches, rendering EKS Anywhere incapable of healing the cluster.

Reviewer 3: nit
```suggestion
As EKS Anywhere management cluster contains the management components of itself plus all the workload clusters it manages, the restoring process can be more complicated than just restoring all the objects from the etcd backup. To be more specific, all the core EKS Anywhere and Cluster API custom resources, that manage the lifecycle (provisioning, upgrading, operating, etc.) of the management and its workload clusters, are stored in the management cluster. This includes all the supporting infrastructure, like virtual machines, networks and load balancers. For example, after a failed cluster upgrade, the infrastructure components can change after the etcd backup was taken. Since the backup does not contain the new state of the half upgraded cluster, simply restoring it can create virtual machines UUID and IP mismatches, rendering EKS Anywhere incapable of healing the cluster.
```

    Using vSphere provider as an example, we are moving the Cluster API custom resources, such as `vpsherevms`, `vspheremachines` and `machines` of the **workload clusters**, from the old management cluster to the new management cluster created in above step. Using the `--filter-cluster` flag with `clusterctl move` command so that we are only targeting the custom resources from the workload clusters.

    ```bash
    MGMT_CLUSTER_OLD="mgmt-old"
    MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW="mgmt-new"
    MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW_KUBECONFIG=${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig
    WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_1="w01"
    WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_2="w02"

    # Substitute the workspace path with the workspace you are using
    WORKSPACE_PATH="/home/ec2-user/eks-a"
    CLUSTER_STATE_BACKUP_LATEST=$(ls -Art ${WORKSPACE_PATH}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_OLD} | grep 'cluster-state-backup' | tail -1)
    CLUSTER_STATE_BACKUP_LATEST_PATH=${WORKSPACE_PATH}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_OLD}/${CLUSTER_STATE_BACKUP_LATEST}/

    # Substitute the container version with whatever EKS Anywhere CLI version you are using
    CONTAINER=public.ecr.aws/eks-anywhere/cli-tools:v0.16.2-eks-a-41

>     # The clusterctl move command needs to be executed on each workload cluster you have. It will will only move the workload cluster resources from the EKS Anywhere backup to the new management cluster. If you have multiple workload clusters, you have to run the command for each cluster as shown below.

Reviewer 3: nit: can we break this up into multiple lines so it's easier to read when rendererd?
```suggestion
    # The clusterctl move command needs to be executed for each workload cluster. 
    # It will only move the workload cluster resources from the EKS Anywhere backup to the new management cluster. 
    # If you have multiple workload clusters, you have to run the command for each cluster as shown below.
```

    # Move workload cluster w01 resources to the new management cluster mgmt-new

>     docker run -i --network host -w $(pwd) -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock -v $(pwd):/$(pwd) --entrypoint clusterctl ${CONTAINER} move \

Reviewer 3: do we need to mount the docker sock? This container is only running clusterctl so it shouldn't need docker.sock?

    ```bash
    kubectl get clusters -n default --kubeconfig ${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig

    NAME       AGE
    mgmt-new   13h
    w01        11h
    w02        11h

    kubectl get clusters.cluster.x-k8s.io -n eksa-system --kubeconfig ${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig

    NAME       PHASE         AGE
    mgmt-new   Provisioned   11h   
    w01        Provisioned   11h   
    w02        Provisioned   11h 

    kubectl get kcp -n eksa-system  --kubeconfig ${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig

    NAME       CLUSTER    INITIALIZED   API SERVER AVAILABLE   REPLICAS   READY   UPDATED   UNAVAILABLE   AGE   VERSION
    mgmt-new   mgmt-new   true          true                   2          2       2                       11h   v1.27.1-eks-1-27-4
    w01        w01        true          true                   2          2       2                       11h   v1.27.1-eks-1-27-4
    w02        w02        true          true                   2          2       2                       11h   v1.27.1-eks-1-27-4
    ```

## Restore a workload cluster 

> Similar to failed management cluster without infrastructure components change, follow the [External etcd backup and restore]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/etcdbackup" >}}) to restore the workload cluster itself from the backup.

Reviewer 3: Are you also planning on adding a section here for restoring a workload cluster if infrastructure changes do happen? 
For example: during a workload cluster upgrade, if all the CP got rolled out but the upgrade failed during worker upgrade, a simple ETCD restore won't work, since doing a restore would cause the node names, IPs and potentially other things to revert to a state that is longer valid.
Etcd restore is really only a good idea if users lose only their etcd cluster entirely and want to recover their data, or they want to revert their own deployments to the previous state and nothing else in the infra (nodes specifically) has changed.

Author: yea i was kinda avoid talking about this until we have a solution for the case where workload cluster is completely inaccessible / infrastructure changed. But you are right, let me add these notes for clarification.

{{% alert title="Warning" color="warning" %}}

Do not apply the etcd restore unless you are very sure that the infrastructure layer is not changed after the etcd backup was taken. In other words, the nodes, machines, VMs, and their assigned IPs need to be exactly the same as when the backup was taken.

{{% /alert %}}

### Cluster not accessible or infrastructure components changed after etcd backup was taken

If the cluster is no longer accessible in any means, or the infrastructure machines are changed after the etcd backup was taken, restoring this management cluster itself from the outdated etcd backup will not work. Instead, you need to create a new management cluster, and migrate all the EKS Anywhere resources of the old workload clusters to the new one, so that the new management cluster can maintain the new ownership of managing the existing workload clusters. Below is an example of migrating a failed management cluster `mgmt-old` with its workload clusters `w01` and `w02` to a new management cluster `mgmt-new`:

1. Create a new management cluster to which you will be migrating your workload clusters later.

>     You can define a cluster config similar to your old management cluster, with a different cluster name, and run cluster creation of the new management cluster.

Reviewer 4: > with a different cluster name

is this necessary? why?

Author: it is not necessary, just more clear. Esp when old cluster still exists/accessible with the folder name

    ```sh

>     eksctl anywhere create cluster -f mgmt-new.yaml

Reviewer 4: I think we should make it very clear that they need to use the exact same eks-a version their old management cluster was at.

    ```

1. Move the custom resources of all the workload clusters to the new management cluster created above.

    Using the vSphere provider as an example, we are moving the Cluster API custom resources, such as `vpsherevms`, `vspheremachines` and `machines` of the **workload clusters**, from the old management cluster to the new management cluster created in above step. By using the `--filter-cluster` flag with the `clusterctl move` command, we are only targeting the custom resources from the workload clusters.

    ```bash
    MGMT_CLUSTER_OLD="mgmt-old"
    MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW="mgmt-new"
    MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW_KUBECONFIG=${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig
    WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_1="w01"
    WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_2="w02"

    # Substitute the workspace path with the workspace you are using
    WORKSPACE_PATH="/home/ec2-user/eks-a"
    CLUSTER_STATE_BACKUP_LATEST=$(ls -Art ${WORKSPACE_PATH}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_OLD} | grep 'cluster-state-backup' | tail -1)

>     CLUSTER_STATE_BACKUP_LATEST_PATH=${WORKSPACE_PATH}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_OLD}/${CLUSTER_STATE_BACKUP_LATEST}/

Reviewer 4: It's cool to have this automated here but I think we should explain what this is in a way that allows the user to understand the right value and set it themselves if they need to. IMO understanding all these steps and what they do is more important that providing a script that does everything automatically.

In a lot cases, something will not work and will require some manual tinkering. If we don't have enough "text" explanation, users will need to deeply read the code to understand what it does. And reading bash is not the easiest thing to do :)

>     # Substitute the EKS Anywhere release version with whatever CLI version you are using

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    # Substitute the EKS Anywhere release version with the EKS-A version of the original management cluster
```

    NAME       AGE
    mgmt-new   13h
    w01        11h
    w02        11h

    kubectl get clusters.cluster.x-k8s.io -n eksa-system --kubeconfig ${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig

    NAME       PHASE         AGE
    mgmt-new   Provisioned   11h   
    w01        Provisioned   11h   
    w02        Provisioned   11h 

    kubectl get kcp -n eksa-system  --kubeconfig ${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig

    NAME       CLUSTER    INITIALIZED   API SERVER AVAILABLE   REPLICAS   READY   UPDATED   UNAVAILABLE   AGE   VERSION
    mgmt-new   mgmt-new   true          true                   2          2       2                       11h   v1.27.1-eks-1-27-4
    w01        w01        true          true                   2          2       2                       11h   v1.27.1-eks-1-27-4
    w02        w02        true          true                   2          2       2                       11h   v1.27.1-eks-1-27-4
    ```

## Restore a workload cluster 

### Cluster accessible and the infrastructure components not changed after etcd backup was taken

> Similar to failed management cluster without infrastructure components change, follow the [External etcd backup and restore]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/etcdbackup" >}}) to restore the workload cluster itself from the backup.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Similar to the failed management cluster without infrastructure components change situation, follow the [External etcd backup and restore]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/etcdbackup" >}}) to restore the workload cluster itself from the backup.
```

{{% alert title="Warning" color="warning" %}}

> Do not apply the etcd restore unless you are very sure that the infrastructure layer is not changed after the etcd backup was taken - i.e. the node, machines, VMs and their assigned IPs need to be exactly the same as when the backup was taken.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Do not apply the etcd restore unless you are very sure that the infrastructure layer is not changed after the etcd backup was taken. In other words, the nodes, machines, VMs and their assigned IPs need to be exactly the same as when the backup was taken.
```

{{% /alert %}}

### Cluster not accessible or infrastructure components changed after etcd backup was taken

> During a workload cluster upgrade, if all the control plane nodes get rolled out but the upgrade fails during worker nodes upgrade, a simple etcd restore will not work, since doing a restore would cause the node names, IPs and potentially other infrastructure configurations to revert to a state that is no longer valid. Similarly, when the workload cluster is completely inaccessible, restoring etcd in a newly created workload cluster will not work due to the mismatch between the new and old clusters' node spec. 

Reviewer 4: This is interesting. I'm assuming we have tested this. Do we have the error messages of the different components?

Author: etcd backup includes backing up the node itself. So the new workload cluster w02 will have original cluster w01 node spec after etcd backup. And they will all be `notReady` state

Reviewer 4: Ah I see I see. Can the user just go and delete the old node objects with kubectl? For some providers they will be deleted automatically, but there is no harm in doing it manually.

Is this the only issue with the outdated backup? If it is, it seems like deleting the node objects is a fair tradeoff vs having to tinker with capi objects or recreating the cluster.

> Restoring etcd effectively takes a cluster back in time and all clients will experience a conflicting, parallel history. This can impact the behavior of watching components like Kubernetes controller managers, EKS Anywhere cluster controller manager, Cluster API controller managers. Etcd restore is only suitable if you lose only your etcd cluster and want to recover your data, or revert your own deployments to the previous state and nothing else in the infrastructure layer (nodes specifically) has changed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Restoring etcd effectively takes a cluster back in time and all clients will experience a conflicting, parallel history. This can impact the behavior of watching components like Kubernetes controller managers, EKS Anywhere cluster controller manager, and Cluster API controller managers. Etcd restore is only suitable if you lose only your etcd cluster and want to recover your data, or revert your own deployments to the previous state and nothing else in the infrastructure layer (nodes specifically) has changed.
```

> Therefore under this extreme circumstance, you may need to manually update the CAPI infrastructure objects, such as the infra VMs and machines to use the existing or latest configurations in order to bring the workload cluster back to healthy state. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Therefore under this extreme circumstance, you may need to manually update the CAPI infrastructure objects, such as the infra VMs and machines to use the existing or latest configurations in order to bring the workload cluster back to a healthy state. 
```

> Therefore under this extreme circumstance, you may need to manually update the CAPI infrastructure objects, such as the infra VMs and machines to use the existing or latest configurations in order to bring the workload cluster back to a healthy state.

Reviewer 4: I don't understand this part. What does need to be updated? Why?

I understand if we haven't had time to test this yet, but to me this line is confusing and doesn't really tell the user what to do. If we don't know/can't really provide the right instructions, shouldn't we just advice to create a new workload cluster and move the workloads?

Author: I just don't have an exact/concrete plan for this situation yet.

> create a new workload cluster and move the workloads?

move the workloads how? with third party backup solution like velero?

Reviewer 4: that depends on the user setup
But I'm assuming everyone has at least the yaml manifests checked in a git repo. Even if they don't have everything automated, everyone should be able to redeploy all those manifests in the new cluster.

    spec:
      managementCluster:
        name: mgmt-new # This needs to be updated with the new management cluster name.
      ...
    ```

    ```yaml
    # workload cluster w02
    ---
    apiVersion: anywhere.eks.amazonaws.com/v1alpha1
    kind: Cluster
    metadata:
      name: w02
      namespace: default
    spec:
      managementCluster:
        name: mgmt-new # This needs to be updated with the new management cluster name.
      ...
    ```

    Make sure that apart from the `managementCluster` field you updated above, all the other cluster configs of the workload clusters need to stay the same as the old workload clusters resources after the old management cluster fails.

    Apply the updated cluster config of each workload cluster in the new management cluster.

    ```bash
    MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW="mgmt-new"
    MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW_KUBECONFIG=${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig

    kubectl apply -f w01/w01-eks-a-cluster.yaml --kubeconfig ${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW_KUBECONFIG}
    kubectl apply -f w02/w02-eks-a-cluster.yaml --kubeconfig ${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW_KUBECONFIG}
    ```

1. Validate all clusters are in the desired state.

    ```bash

>     kubectl get clusters -n default --kubeconfig ${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig

Reviewer 4: you could check here that the eks-a clusters are also ready through their status
like with a custom column in this command

    w01        Provisioned   11h   
    w02        Provisioned   11h 

    kubectl get kcp -n eksa-system  --kubeconfig ${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}/${MGMT_CLUSTER_NEW}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig

    NAME       CLUSTER    INITIALIZED   API SERVER AVAILABLE   REPLICAS   READY   UPDATED   UNAVAILABLE   AGE   VERSION
    mgmt-new   mgmt-new   true          true                   2          2       2                       11h   v1.27.1-eks-1-27-4
    w01        w01        true          true                   2          2       2                       11h   v1.27.1-eks-1-27-4
    w02        w02        true          true                   2          2       2                       11h   v1.27.1-eks-1-27-4
    ```

## Restore a workload cluster 

### Cluster accessible and the infrastructure components not changed after etcd backup was taken

Similar to the failed management cluster without infrastructure components change situation, follow the [External etcd backup and restore]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/etcdbackup" >}}) to restore the workload cluster itself from the backup.

### Cluster not accessible or infrastructure components changed after etcd backup was taken

> If the workload cluster is still accessible, but the infrastructure machines are changed after the etcd backup was taken, you can still try restoring the cluster itself from the etcd backup. Although doing so is risky: it can potentially cause the node names, IPs and other infrastructure configurations to revert to a state that is no longer valid. Restoring etcd effectively takes a cluster back in time and all clients will experience a conflicting, parallel history. This can impact the behavior of watching components like Kubernetes controller managers, EKS Anywhere cluster controller manager, and Cluster API controller managers. You may need to manually update the CAPI infrastructure objects, such as the infra VMs and machines to use the existing or latest configurations in order to bring the workload cluster back to a healthy state.

Reviewer 4: > You may need to manually update the CAPI infrastructure objects, such as the infra VMs and machines to use the existing or latest configurations in order to bring the workload cluster back to a healthy state.

I think I'm missing the scenario where this is needed. Shouldn't this work in the same way as the process you outline below (restoring backup in a new workload cluster).

Author: yea it does. we can remove this for less confusion

> If the original workload cluster is no longer accessible in any means, or restoring the workload cluster itself from the outdated etcd does not bring the cluster back to healthy state, then you need to create a new workload cluster based of the same management cluster that managed the original workload cluster, and restore all your workload applications from the etcd backup of the original workload cluster to the new one, so that the same management cluster can maintain the ownership of managing the new workload cluster, with all the same data from the old workload cluster. Below is an example of applying the etcd backup `etcd-snapshot-w01.db` of a failed workload cluster `w01` to a new workload cluster `w02`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the original workload cluster is no longer accessible in any means, or restoring the workload cluster itself from the outdated etcd does not bring the cluster back to healthy state, then you need to create a new workload cluster based on the same management cluster that managed the original workload cluster, and restore all your workload applications from the etcd backup of the original workload cluster to the new one, so that the same management cluster can maintain the ownership of managing the new workload cluster, with all the same data from the old workload cluster. Below is an example of applying the etcd backup `etcd-snapshot-w01.db` of a failed workload cluster `w01` to a new workload cluster `w02`:
```

1. Create a new workload cluster to which you will be migrating your workloads and applications from the original failed workload cluster.

    You can define a cluster config similar to your old workload cluster, with a different cluster name (if the old workload cluster still exists), and run cluster creation of the new workload cluster with the **exact same EKS Anywhere version** used to create the old workload cluster.

    ```bash
    eksctl anywhere create cluster -f w02.yaml --kubeconfig $MGMT_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG
    ```

> 1. Follow the [External etcd backup and restore]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/etcdbackup" >}}) to restore the old workload cluster's etcd backup `etcd-snapshot-w01.db` onto the new workload cluster `w02`.
> 
>     Use different restore process based on OS family:
>     * [BottleRocket]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/bottlerocket-etcd-backup/#restore-etcd-from-backup" >}})
>     * [Ubuntu]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/ubuntu-rhel-etcd-backup/#restore" >}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Follow the [External etcd backup and restore]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/etcdbackup" >}}) to restore the old workload cluster's etcd backup `etcd-snapshot-w01.db` onto the new workload cluster `w02`. Use different restore process based on OS family:
    * [BottleRocket]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/bottlerocket-etcd-backup/#restore-etcd-from-backup" >}})
    * [Ubuntu]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/ubuntu-rhel-etcd-backup/#restore" >}})
```
Thought this flows better but if you would like to keep the previous you should

>     You might notice that after restoring the original etcd backup to the new workload cluster `w02`, all the node names have prefix `w01-*` and the nodes go to `NotReady` state. This is because restoring etcd effectively applies the node data from the original cluster which causes a conflicting history and can impact the behavior of watching components like Kubelets, Kubernetes controller managers.

Reviewer 4: Should we add a step to delete the old node entries?
I think some of the providers will leave them hanging and will need manual cleanup

    Events:
      Type    Reason          Age    From             Message
      ----    ------          ----   ----             -------
      Normal  RegisteredNode  9m32s  node-controller  Node w01-bbtdd event: Registered Node w01-bbtdd in Controller
      Normal  NodeNotReady    8m52s  node-controller  Node w01-bbtdd status is now: NodeNotReady
    ```

1. Restart Kubelet of the control plane and worker nodes of the workload cluster `w02`.

    In order to bring back the nodes to ready state, you need to manually restart the Kubelet on all the control plane and worker nodes. Kubelet registers the node itself with the apisever which then updates etcd with the correct node data of the new workload cluster `w02`.

    {{< tabpane >}}
    {{< tab header="Ubuntu or RHEL" lang="bash" >}}
# SSH into the control plane and worker nodes. You must do this for each node.
ssh -i ${SSH_KEY} ${SSH_USERNAME}@<node IP>
sudo su
systemctl restart kubelet
    {{< /tab >}}
    {{< tab header="Bottlerocket" lang="bash" >}}
# SSH into the control plane and worker nodes. You must do this for each node.
ssh -i ${SSH_KEY} ${SSH_USERNAME}@<node IP>
apiclient exec admin bash

> sheltie

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sudo sheltie
```
Or is the sudo not required here? I think if you ssh to the node and directly run sudo sheltie, that is also enough not requiring you to run the apiclient command right?

Author: when you are in admin container, sudo is not required

## Restore a workload cluster

### Cluster accessible and the infrastructure components not changed after etcd backup was taken

Similar to the failed management cluster without infrastructure components change situation, follow the [External etcd backup and restore]({{< relref "../etcd-backup-restore/etcdbackup" >}}) to restore the workload cluster itself from the backup.

### Cluster not accessible or infrastructure components changed after etcd backup was taken

If the workload cluster is still accessible, but the infrastructure machines are changed after the etcd backup was taken, you can still try restoring the cluster itself from the etcd backup. Although doing so is risky: it can potentially cause the node names, IPs and other infrastructure configurations to revert to a state that is no longer valid. Restoring etcd effectively takes a cluster back in time and all clients will experience a conflicting, parallel history. This can impact the behavior of watching components like Kubernetes controller managers, EKS Anywhere cluster controller manager, and Cluster API controller managers.

> If the original workload cluster is no longer accessible in any means, or restoring the workload cluster itself from the outdated etcd does not bring the cluster back to healthy state, then you need to create a new workload cluster based on the same management cluster that managed the original workload cluster, and restore all your workload applications from the etcd backup of the original workload cluster to the new one, so that the same management cluster can maintain the ownership of managing the new workload cluster, with all the same data from the old workload cluster. Below is an example of applying the etcd backup `etcd-snapshot-w01.db` of a failed workload cluster `w01` to a new workload cluster `w02`:

Reviewer 4: nit: this sentence is very long. the content is good but maybe we can split it into multiple sentences

Author: hmmm any recommendation to update this? it reads ok to me L)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the original workload cluster becomes inaccessible or cannot be restored to a healthy state from an outdated etcd, a new workload cluster needs to be created. This new cluster should be managed by the same management cluster that oversaw the original. You must then restore your workload applications to this new cluster from the etcd backup of the original. This ensures the management cluster retains control, with all data from the old cluster intact. Below is an example of applying the etcd `backup etcd-snapshot-w01.db` from a failed workload cluster `w01` to a new cluster `w02`:
```

    ```bash
    export MGMT_CLUSTER="mgmt"
    export MGMT_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG=${MGMT_CLUSTER}/${MGMT_CLUSTER}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig

    eksctl anywhere create cluster -f w02.yaml --kubeconfig $MGMT_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG
    ```

1. Save the config map objects of the new workload cluster to a file.

    Save a copy of the new workload cluster's `cluster-info`, `kube-proxy` and `kubeadm-config` config map objects before the restore. This is necessary as the etcd restore will override the config maps above with the metadata information (certificates, endpoint, etc.) from the old cluster.

    ```bash
    export WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_NAME="w02"
    export WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG=${WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_NAME}/${WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_NAME}-eks-a-cluster.kubeconfig

    cat <<EOF >> w02-cm.yaml
    $(kubectl get -n kube-public cm cluster-info -oyaml --kubeconfig $WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG)
    ---
    $(kubectl get -n kube-system cm kube-proxy -oyaml --kubeconfig $WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG)
    ---
    $(kubectl get -n kube-system cm kubeadm-config -oyaml --kubeconfig $WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG)
    EOF
    ```

>     Remove the metadata's `creationTimestamp`, `resourceVersion`, `uid` from the config map.

Author: is there a better way? a kubectl cmd?

    kubectl delete node w01-bbtdd --kubeconfig $WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG
    kubectl delete node w01-md-0-66dbcfb56cxng8lc-8ppv5 --kubeconfig $WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG
    ```

1. Re-apply the original config map objects of the workload cluster.

    Re-apply the `cluster-info`, `kube-proxy` and `kubeadm-config` config map objects we saved in previous step to the workload cluster `w02`.

    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f w02-cm.yaml --kubeconfig $WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG
    ```

1. Validate the nodes are in ready state.

    ```bash
    kubectl get nodes --kubeconfig $WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG

    NAME                              STATUS   ROLES           AGE     VERSION
    w02-djshz                         Ready    control-plane   9m7s    v1.27.3-eks-6f07bbc
    w02-md-0-6bbc8dd6d4xbgcjh-wfmb6   Ready    <none>          3m55s   v1.27.3-eks-6f07bbc
    ```

1. Restart the system pods to ensure that they use the config maps you re-applied in previous step.

    ```bash
    kubectl rollout restart ds kube-proxy -n kube-system --kubeconfig $WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG
    ```

1. Unpause the cluster reconcilers

    ```bash
    # unpause control plane reconcilation

>     kubectl --kubeconfig=${MGMT_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG} -n eksa-system annotate machinehealthchecks ${WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_NAME}-kcp-unhealthy cluster.x-k8s.io/paused-

Reviewer 4: why `${WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_NAME}-kcp-unhealthy`?

Reviewer 4: also
```suggestion
    kubectl --kubeconfig=${MGMT_CLUSTER_KUBECONFIG} -n eksa-system annotate kcp ${WORKLOAD_CLUSTER_NAME}-kcp-unhealthy cluster.x-k8s.io/paused-
```
